Hello, everybody. Welcome to a new episode of the
Center. I'm your host as always Ricardo Loops. And
today I'm joined by Doctor Sergio Al Meja. He
is senior research scientist in Biological Anthropology at the
American Museum of Natural History. And today we're focusing
on, he's edited book, Humans Perspectives on our, on
our evolution from world experts. So, Doctor Almera, welcome
to the show. It's a big pleasure to everyone.
Thank you Ricardo for having me here.
So you brought together this very interesting book uh
about basically the opinions of several different people, experts,
mostly anthropologists, but also people from other fields as
we're going to talk about uh to hear more
about their perspectives on certain big questions in human
evolution. So, uh but tell us a little bit
more uh about the history behind it. I mean,
what is this book really about? Why did you
decide to write it? What motivated you basically,
um I think with a constellation of different things,
not just one, but I guess one of the
first things that kind of like um got me
thinking about this making a was just making a
book, not this book, just I was at the
time, a professor in a, in a university in
Washington and, and, uh, and I was teaching among
other courses, private evolution, human evolution. And, you know,
like, it's really hard to have like a one
book where you can have everything. Right. And, and
they are like few books. They are very good
books, but always back me that every author has,
of course, their own, like, views on how everything
happened, right? And I didn't wanna kind of just
give one sided view of, of the sta the
state of the art in, in a, in a
field of any field of evolution in general. But
human evolution particularly is so much, you have so
much personal investment on it, right? That every two
weeks with some news, uh this fossil changes everything
and so on. So I really was like, struggling
to like have one source, so like to use
as the main material for my courses for my
teaching. So basically, I kind of like, didn't follow
any book and was just trying to like, provide
everything that was in the primary, primary literature, right?
Um But it was kind of too much, you
know, for like Jessica Intro to course human evolution.
So I always teach, I was just, I kept
thinking I should come up with some sort of
book that I can have everything there in an
interesting way. And I was going to write my
own book about it. But then kind of like
the idea just crossed my mind, like, why I'm
just like, would be so cool to have a
place where it's just like a, so sort of
like encyclopedia where you can look for every different
people that are very well known in the field.
From different aspects, from fossils, to geology, to morphology,
to behavior and kind of like, just introduce them.
So people know who, who they are, what they
work on and then just ask them the same
questions, you know, that that and just that let
them speak by themselves. So that on the one
hand, they would provide like a very wide perspective
of all things like what the ideas are about
human evolution. On the other hand, it would highlight
the problem that I was having that. It's not
one story, human evolution. I know that the problem
or not, but clearly, it's like everyone has a
different story. And that, to me, it was important
to remark that. So that's how the idea emerged.
And then kind of like I started contacting some
of my close colleagues about it and, you know,
like over like I was in the field and
I was like, coming up with ideas and they
had to, what questions should I ask them and
why? And, and I had like a little experiment
test test group, you know, and, and, and usually
the most of them were like very senior people
in the field because they are like kind of
my, my personal heroes and sheers, you know, so,
and because I had, uh I was in a
good position basically to make this something like this
happen because I met most of the people in
the book, not everyone, but most of them. I
actually have known them for years. I have even
worked with some of them. So I was thinking
I could, something like that could, could happen and
I probably can't make it happen. So I just
kind of went ahead with it, you know, it
was kinda an experiment, it was an experiment that
I didn't know what was gonna happen. And in
that being a very interesting book, but, you know,
could have never happened to,
by the way, some of them have already have
on the show also. So with that, uh some
of the people you've uh basically interviewed for the
book, I've also read on the show as guests.
So
I know, I know, I know, I know because
they are very interesting people and they are worth
knowing and, and listening to.
Yeah. And by the way you mentioned there that
you basically ask the same set of questions to
all of the people you interviewed for the book.
How did you arrive at that set of questions
and why do you think they are so illuminating?
So I um I mean, they could have been
of course other questions and actually some of them
after the fact have suggested to me like, oh,
it would have been so nice that you have
asked these other questions as well, you know. And,
but it was just like, well, this is what
we have now. And basically these questions were set
up to be some sort of um blank canvas
for them to talk about what they wanted to
talk to. And even though I sent to everyone,
the same set of 10 questions, I didn't ask
them to answer all of them. I asked because
they are kind of, they are like some are
more like personal about their origins and background. Others
are more about the meat of what they work
on and what they think is interesting. And then,
then it's a set of them that is more
a kind of philosophical question. So different people, I,
I told them like, you don't have to answer
them all, just answer the ones that you feel
like you want to answer and you can use
your own words and your own length. You know,
there are some people who answer with one word,
people who answer with a one sentence, people who
answer it with a one page. And actually many
people in, in the book have told me that
they were surprised to read the answers of the
others because they, they know them and they clearly
like you can kind of like the personality of
every person is kind of reflected in the way
they answer because it's just the style, the, how
much they talk, you know, and I didn't edit
any of that and we just, like, I promised
them, we would only edit for like style, you
know, but not change anything else. So because we
wanted this book to kind of reflect everyone's ideas
and personality, it's like it feels like you kind
of know a little bit the person in person,
even though you might not good. You uh So
I know that answer your question or you want
something more specific about the each of the questions.
Uh
Yeah. Uh I mean, uh yeah, perhaps we, we
can get into a few of them. So what
perhaps are some of the questions that you would
highlight there?
Um um I mean, I don't, they're all these
10 were like kind of a selection already of
many, right? But let me just, maybe I can
just do a very short summary of each of
them. And so I can explain a little more,
but basically it was 10 questions plus a bonus
question. And the third, the three first questions were
kind of more like, um I breaker, it's a
way to produce so they can talk about themselves,
their background. And you know, the first question, for
example is about, they can talk about their beginnings
and they can describe the moment in their lives
and what they kind of think started for them
in their career and what they work on. And
the second question is, is, is called game changer.
It's basically if there is any particular study or
book or discovery that it changed everything for them,
the way they think, the way they look at
what they do. And that, that's a very, that
was a, an interesting outcome on that uh compilation
of answer to that question is that there is
now a section at the end of the book,
which is recommended readings, which basically is just a
compilation of the papers and books that the experts
like responded that. So like they thought they were
game changing, studying her work and many of them
are the same, they gave the same and many
of them I pointed to same study, same, same
books. So I thought we thought it was worthwhile
to have just those, all them compiled at the
other the book. It like it is a good
resource. The third question was something just it was
about uh if they think it's something amazing, something
amazing about human evolution, something that blows their mind.
I was just also part of the click in
their eyes about if there is something that really
strikes them, you know, and you will have answers
from like it amazes me that humans have got
in so far, you know, because we're so stupid
or other people would answer like, you know, like
they're amazed about particular aspects of like human evolution,
you know, as compared to other animals. So it,
it goes all over depending on the personality of
the, of the, of the, the expert in that
case. No. And then what I, what I call
the, the cool questions, the, the they, they are
designed to get more to the meat of like
what they work on what they think is interesting
in a but in a kind of in a
interesting fun uh engaging way, right? So for my
favorite question in that section is the time travel
question, which basically I asked them, like, if you
had like a one shot round trip in a
time machine to which specific time and place would
you go past or future? And why? You know,
and that's basically a question. It's just a way,
it's an interesting way to ask them. Like, why
do you, like if someone is working about studying
how lustrous aeris was walking, they probably would. The
answer usually is, oh, I would travel 2 million
years ago to Ethiopia to this particular site in
Haar and, and like have some sort of kinematic
like portable lab to study like the gate of
this species to, to test if what I've been
like, thinking for the last 20 years is, is
real or not, you know, but that's like an
entry way to like the study of kinematics in,
in living in the study of motion, in living
species. How can we infer the motion of the
species. Why is that important and so on? Right.
Another question in that section of the core question
is driving factors, which basically it was asking like,
what happened, what's the driving factors that made a
nape evolve into human at some point? Right. And
um and this is just like the, it's a,
it's a different way to ask like, why are
they humans? You know, why are we here? You
know, what happened originally speaking? And you know, it
was interesting because there were answered all over the
place, you know, from like it is impossible to
know from the typical answer because we would come
by it and we can vipe it because the
the environment changed, it was more open, you know,
it's all you can see all the views about,
about what we different people think like jumpstart the
human. And it's clear from the answers that this
is the one answer. The next question in this
section was like future evolution, you know, just like
basically, what do you think will be shaping human
or in the future and from time to the
future? And it's just a way to ask like,
are humans still evolving? And so how are they
evolving? What do you think are the next steps
in our revolution? And you have, you have all
over, you know that some people think that, you
know, like we're gonna be extinct soon or people
think that there is no way to know too
much contingency or people provide very specific answers about
how exactly we're gonna look a million years from
now. Very interesting. Um The next question here was
evolutionary lessons which basically was asked, this was very
important for me because I was just after 20
plus years working in this field. I, you know,
I find it very interesting, but I always wonder,
is this actually precise, interesting? Is it useful? And
we learned something that could be practical for our,
for our daily life? And again, you have answered
from Moreover, like some people would answer, I don't
think this is useful, but you know, like any
like elementary science is very interesting and it's worth
studying just for the sake of studying it. Other
people actually say no, no, this is could have
like uh very important implications for our daily life
to provide specific examples. I don't know if you
want to go into this now or later. But
like, you know, one example was like the one
of the experts uh Professor in Japan was saying
that that um the accident after the tsunami in
the Fukushima power plant in 2011 could have been
much worse if they, if the people who built
the power station have listened to the scientists who
were like advising them to put the the like
the power back up in higher grounds because it
was historically known based in Geo Geological studies that,
that tsunamis have reached that region before. So, but
they didn't pay attention to that. So they put
them in lower ground and they, they were affected
as well. So it was horrible accident after the
other accident. And then the, the, the last questions
that I asked was, were, were kind of in
the philosophical side and one was just arguments special,
you know, and again, you have all over it,
it was kind of like a way to trigger
some reactions and I it did trigger some reactions
because some people would be like, of course, we're
special, you know, we have language, we talk to
each other, we make books like this, we ask
weird questions about our evolution. Nothing else as this,
of course, we're special. Other people would go to
the other extreme and be like every species by
definition is special. That's the definition of a species.
Uh We just as special as being a human
as an elephant is special, human elephant, right? Um
And then is everything in between. Uh So it's
very interesting because it really gathers like, oh how
wide the perspectives are as many as people in
the book are probably more, you know, and this
is just a selection. Next question was unleash and
spirituality. Like, basically, I was asking the experts if
they think that they are compatible with having a,
a scientific view of the world in study with
the study of evolution or human evolution specifically. Are
this view compatible or not? Again, you have all
over, you know. So I actually, I thought that
no one would answer. Many scientists would try to
not answer this question. But I was really surprised
that many actually did respond to this question and,
and it went from not compatible whatsoever to fully
compatible. I don't see the problem because one addresses
the whole things happen. The other address is that
why things happen? One is about morality, the other
is about this. It's very interesting that you can
see a clear divide between researchers in the US
and in the US in this view. Um Then
the last question was kind of meant more for
people interested in the in the field of human
evolution, whether they are specific students or young researchers
or just people who are interested, like, what advice
would they give to people interested? They want to
know more about it. But I think it's gonna
be a useful um resource for, for students specifically
because they provide advice that help them like go
where they are today, you know. Um And you
know, like it's uh I think it's a could
be a good resource. The answer to that question,
I think I was not expecting a lot from
that, but actually many people kind of focus on
giving a good advice to it. And then the
bonus question I asked was like, basically who would
you ask these questions to living our life ie
or that right? And it is very interesting as
well because people pointed from classic philosophers to like
someone in the future who know all these answers
already, what they would think, you know, other people
suggested other experts like today, that was a good
resource for me to actually then reach those invited,
invited them to bring the book. So those are
the, those are the questions.
Uh So you, you also divide the book into
several different parts. I mean, because people, if you
of course interview different experts and some of them
are more focused on some particular periods in our
evolution and of course, uh others are from different
areas, even some of are not anthropologists. But you
start with the people who study the, the antecedents
of human evolution. II, I would like to ask
you here, what exactly are the antecedents of human
evolution? I mean, what kinds of experts are studying
this topic?
So basically, um those are people who are focusing
their efforts and deciding what happened before, before human
evolution. So how do you find before human evolution?
That's uh that's an interesting question on its own.
But basically, it's, you know, before the lineage who
basically was clearly evolving into us today even originated,
you know, and that, so that's people who studied
climate evolution in general or, or a evolution in
general before, like human, the human lineage originated from
people who just have um you know, study like
older, like origins of mammals even, you know, because
I think that it was a way to highlight
that, that perspective is equally like, it's really hard
to define a concrete like section of time that
is human evolution because there, I, I find it
very limiting because many, many researchers who work in
human evolution, they basically, there are some that only
look at modern humans and maybe and compare them
with the chimpanzees because chimpanzees are our closest living
today, right? And they, and they kind of like,
you know, that's, that's human evolution, like whatever is
different from us and chimps, that's what's changed on
our lineage, that's what's happened in human evolution, right?
And um I think it's very limiting because that's
basically assuming many things. One of them, the biggest
assumption here is that chimpanzees have never evolved, right?
Like they are just some sort of a static
ancestor and it's like humans and humans and chimpanzees
have evolved from a common ancestor, they live around
60 million years ago, you know, but that ancestor
also like evolved from an ancestor shared with gorillas
that live around 10 million years ago. And then
we all share a primate ancestor, you know, at
some point more than 60 million years ago. So,
you know, like when do you decide what is,
you know, everything that happened before is essential for
what happened later? It's like a continuum, right? Like
you could argue that human evolution is just evolution.
We're just one of the outcomes of a larger
process with millions of species over millions of years.
So like it's hard to. So I thought that
just I would be interested to bring that into
the, not just ask questions to experts that work
in specifically human evolution and fossils that are clearly
are human, but people who are looking at the
broader picture from things that happened before, you know,
or even other groups that are parallel to us
today just to like basically reach the bigger picture,
right? And, and this period in our revolution is
very interesting because it brings together uh primatologists and
paleoanthropologists. And I mean, uh how do you look
at the relationship specifically between primatology and paleoanthropology? Because
uh as far as I understand it, um I,
I've talked, for example, with primatologists who have a
background in biology and then they specialized in the
study of primates. But there are, there are also
anthropologists, specifically paleoanthropologists and sometimes biological anthropologists who themselves
study not only hominids but also other primates, particularly
usually the great ape. So how do you look
at the relationship there between those two different kinds
of experts?
So for example, when people ask me, what do
you study? II, I usually don't say I study
human evolution. I say I study ape and human
evolution. And that's kind of linking back to, to
what I just said that you know, like, like
we, our closest living relatives are the great apes
chimpanzees, the gorillas, the no guan and, and there
is just no way to understand. Like there is
anyone who studies any evolutionary biologist would not, let's
study the evolution of, let's say in dinosaurs, they
don't look at one. I studied the evolution of
T rex. They look at the evolution of the
group that includes direct only by comparing you can
know what is the special or not special or
common in the particular group of interest or species
of interest, right? If you're interested in human evolution,
it's impossible to understand what's especially in humans. If
we not compare with the other things that are
out there, especially the ones that are closer closely
related to us like the Great Tapes. So that's
why it's kind of essential like in and and
in the case, like an anthropology and primatology, like
there is uh this assumption that oh we can
kind of look at living great depth, especially chimpanzees
as some sort of, it's kind of looking at
our past, right? It's like they are similar to
our ancestors. So if a chimpanzee can use tools,
probably our ancestor was using tools. If a chimpanzee
is this kind of a smart, they don't have
developed language, but they have like some, you know,
some they could get in this other way. But
so we can in that our ancestor was probably
also doing that. So that's why they are linked
because it, without comparing, it's impossible to know. What
is this thing in human evolution when you find
a fossil that goes somewhere in the human lineage
and usually that's defined based on, oh, it was
working biped, it was working by purely because it
has this morphology that is more human than chimpanzee.
So you cannot know that if you don't compare
to know where the fossil falls in the, you
know, it, it is this bone, the femur of
Lucy Astros is closer to a human or is
it closer to a chimpanzee or is in between
or is in between but closer to one and
the other? It's impossible to know without comparison. So
that's why comparisons are important and that they, they
go together the different, I think it's for many
pa anthropologists um living primates, particularly great apes and
particular chimpanzees with the, with the great apes. That's
the end of the story. Like the great apes
to them are, are interesting just as this comparative
thing, like something to compare their fossils with, to
know like how primitive or modern their fossil is,
right? And that's, that's, that's fine. Like I think
I started like that back in the day. But
like then it kind of grew i it, it
grew me the curiosity about understanding also the evolution
of the apes because then I realized that, well,
there are also f apes out there and they
don't look like the living apes. So that means
that living great apes are also evolved from something
that something is probably closer to our ancestor than
any living today. So that's what I kind of
like now. It's more, more and more people are.
Ok. It is essential to understand human evolution within
the broader perspective of primate evolution.
Mhm. So, I mean, there's not a strict division
between primatologists and paleoanthropologists, right?
And there is in the sense that some like
primatologist are usually most of the time, they don't
look at fossils. Most of the time they look
at living primates, their biology, their behavior, their genetics
and so on. Anthropologists are more looking at the
fossil record, archaeological record and then look at living
primates as kind of like their competitive like toolbox
to understand like contextualize what they are finding in
the fossil record. But there are some, there are
some researchers which are kind of have a foot
in each of them. So there are like some
that study puzzles and then they go to the
field and study primates because they feel like they
are interesting on their own as a field of
study. But they, they, they help them better contextualize
what they find in the fossil record. There are
many like that, but it's like it's a minority.
Usually this DNH everyone is so specialized that usually
like anthropologists look at fossils, primatologist, look at living
primates, but there are some, there are some colleagues,
for example, in the book that it was hard
to put them in one section or another of
the book because they kind of do everything, you
know, they, they do archaeology and then they look
for fossils and then they also go and study
chimpanzee behaviors. It's just hard, you know, it was,
it was a kind of like um the edit,
the I was the editor of the book, but
it was like the editor and the, and the
publishing company in Colombia in the present in this
case. And they thought that it, it will be
easier to subdivide the booking section. So we need
to come up with a way to separate the
different experts in different areas. And we did the
best that we could. But, you know, there are
some colleagues that kind of like could have been
in, in all the sections, almost.
No, no, I've had the same experience on the
show interviewing uh some primatologists and some paleoanthropologists because
I have an anthropology and the primatology playlist on
my channel. And sometimes it's very hard to choose
if I should put someone on the primatology or
the anthropology playlist. And usually I end up putting
them in both.
So I think that I think that's the right,
the right decision honestly because because they do both,
they're interesting to both in the both context. They
probably bring out a broader perspectives into each of
them in immediately
a and So another kind of experts that you
interview for the book are the ones that are
focused mostly on the early stages of what you
call the human career in the book. But this
leads us to have one of the, I would
imagine biggest questions in anthropology. That is, when did
we become human? Exactly. I mean, there are of
course several different ways we could approach the question.
We could even tackle it through uh uh from
a philosophical perspective. But since we're talking about anthropology
here, what does it mean to be human in
anthropology?
As you said, there's not a clear answer. Um
I can give you like uh some perspectives on
it um for different people. So basically, um it's
again like we humans, I think I would start
with the philosophy here, which is we humans like
to t everything, everything has to have a name,
everything, everything has to be in a category. But
the reality is that the real world doesn't have
categories, everything is a continuum, right? And so people
has been trying to understand what is human evolution?
When does human evolution start like? And so I
would start by saying like we are Homo sapiens.
Um Basically the genus Homo is by definition, the
human genus. So before there are other hominins, so
they are in the human lineage, but they're closer
to us than to any living other species like
Apis para Anthropy or Rin or the pits heus,
there are so many now but they are not
within the genius homo genus, homo, homo sapiens, they
are like fewer species. They are more and more.
Right, right at the reus gaster ole obeli oluo
senses. There's just so many species now that this
is again, I think we're in a period of
time in which everyone is finding a new fossil
and making a new species of, of the genus
hormone within the genus hormone. And then 10 years
from now, someone is gonna revise the whole evidence
again and come out with only three species and
then it's gonna come out again. It's these are
cycles that happen to happen. But by definition, the
human genus is homo. So everything that is inside
the genus is homo, we basically start the oldest
forces that we have of the genus homo are
like around 2.62 0.7 you know, maybe 2.8 you
know, man, 2.8 years from um Ethiopia. But that's
all we know like most of what we know
of homo, it's a little 2.52 and later on.
And actually this first fs that are within the
genus Homo, which is basically homobiles and related forms
of homobiles is this, it's been a debate over
like since the nineties, I'm still alive today in
which like should we even put these in the
genus Homo? Because they really look so primitive that
maybe they should be in the genus astra pts,
right? Like you said before and astro PTS are
known to have like uh basically general, they have
features in the skeleton that look more kind of
ape, like some feature are more humanlike homo, like
others are more like apelike, more like not exactly
like a chimpanzee, but some, some are more chimpanzee
like others are more like a gorilla. Others are
more like, you know, Utah, others are like other
fossil fossil that we don't have anything alive today,
you know, but clearly they, they were different starting
really starting at 2 million years when we have
Homo actus. Uh AND ho actus is like e
even though that you can see still weird things
like as compared to us, we will be weird
to them, but like to us, they are weird
in the face. Um They still have like thick
eyebrows and smaller like brain cases and like big
faces. But basically from the distance, you would think
it's a human like me, he already has neck
down, it has a body like us. Like they
were like, like very like even bigger than us.
Some of them, some fossils are bigger than humans
alive today. Like very tall. They were probably like
walking by p like we walk, running, hunting, you
know, they're basically from the distance they are like
us. Um So some people would argue that that's
the beginning of what it means to be a
human. But other people. So around 2 million years
ago and also around that time is when we
have, before, we have already stone tools, like all
their stone tools are now like 3 million years
old, but they are very like rudimentary, they're like
big rocks, you know, it's hard to but started
2 million years or something like that or slightly
later. Like with Homo actus, we start having this
like nice, like um like the hand access that
I have like nice symmetry to them. And, and
clearly like that, that technology shows that something else
is happening up here, like, you know, and so
some people would argue that some kind of protolanguage,
you know, like modern language, but like some language
was at play then because it's been their experiments
showing that when you're trying to, to teach someone
else to do something, it's just by looking at
the other doing, it is not as, as much
doesn't work as well as showing and explaining and
you hold this like this and then you have
to do it like that because if not, you're
gonna, this is gonna happen. So there are indirect
evidence, of course, we don't know they were talking,
but this indirect evidence that there was some sort
of more advanced communication right around 2 million years
ago. So is that the beginning of being a
human, other people argue that not yet that it
really was not until around 70,000, 50,000 years ago,
so much, much later, not millions of years, not
hundreds of thousands of years, just thousands of years.
Because around that time with 50,000 years ago, it's
going, you start seeing everywhere, like starting to see
in different places, paintings, you know, personal ornaments, things
that clearly had conceptual meaning, things that people can
give to each other as presents. You know, there,
there is symbol, symbolism is what people call this
augmented reality is like this interior world that we
have today that is made out of concepts. And
that basically shows that these like a very, very
well developed like full fledged modern human language and
that really didn't start before 50,000 years ago. So
again, things is like continuing, probably things happen like
gradually slowly, which is like things took over after
around 50,000 with the full fledged language and culture.
So, but we know that things that things fossils
of humans that, that basically look already like modern
Homo sapiens were already around 200,000 years ago in
Africa. So, and those are currently situated in the
Homo Sapiens group. And then they photo from Homo
Ballet in Ethiopia. They are Homo considered Homo sapiens
and they are 200,000 years old. So, but you
know, but the modern behavior doesn't seem to appear
until later. So that's why people talk about anatomically
modern humans versus modern human behavior. And then it's,
it's hard to tell, it seems that one came
after the other, other, I have colleagues that work
in all their sites in Africa at 300,000 year
old sites. And they, they found traces of ochre,
you know that meaning that probably these, these humans
were like using it to paint themselves to like
signal the others, you know, things like I belong
to this group, you belong to that group. So
language was clearly some there and the beginnings of
modern behaviors were there much earlier. But so when
this is kind of a philosophical question at this
point, when do you put the mark like this
is another human? I don't know, it depends. What
do you, how do you consider, what do you
consider to be among a human and based on
anatomy based on behavior?
Right. And so earlier, I've asked you about primatology
and its relationship to anthropology, but you also interview
experts from other fields, like for example, medicine, psychology,
philosophy, uh how do you think these other disciplines
can contribute to an understanding of what humans are?
But I think it's precisely based on the the
last answer I gave you like there at some
point, we can, as scientists, we can like find
things, study things quantify things. But then at some
point, there is a factor that is not that,
you know, there's more kind of at some point,
it's just purely semantics, purely philosophical like OK, now
hold you based on all this evidence because I
have colleagues that the the colleague that found the
Ochre in Africa 300,000 years ago, this they say
this is the beginning of humanity. The colleagues who
founded the the K paintings 50,000 years ago, they
say, no, this is the beginning of humanity. So
who do you who, who is, who is going
to decide this? I think having a kind of
external views to people who are just in the
trenches of plot itself. Anthropology maybe can provide some
sort of perspective. You know, when you are, let's
say like this is like people who, who study
like, like for example, they would say if you
are inside the washing machine tumbling around you, it's,
it's probably gonna be hard for you to understand
what's happening. But if you are outside looking from
the distance, the thing, you, you might have a
better perspective of what happened, what's happening around you
at that moment. So the idea was kind of
like that like, ok, people who are clearly interested
in understanding human nature, human evolution, but they are
not working specifically with the fossil record, archaeological record,
how they, how they see things are they see
things the same way that we are seeing them
or not. And, and that really like it was
very eye opening for me because one of the,
one of the people in the book, All The
Humans in the book, that was the, the name
of the book kind of was playing with this
is about humans and human evolution. But also it's
kind of showcasing real humans, you know, that it's
kind of uh behind the scene view of the
field and the people behind it, right? But one
of them in the, in this section is more
like the philosophical section is uh is her name
is Mia Landau and she's, she's an anthropologist, right?
But, but she's a peculiar anthropologist because her, she's
also an artist and, and her dissertation, actually, she
was interested both in uh you know, the, both
the, the science of human evolution, but also the
humanistic part of human evolution. What has been written
about it, how it has been written about it
and so on and by kind of kind kind
of by accident, she found out that that many
of the narratives of human evolution since Darwin until
these days, like they are, they follow a narrative
like when and it's not just human evolution, but
science in general, her argument is that humans based
on our language is just kind of a, there's
no other way around it, the way we communicate
using human language. It's in a, it's always a
narrative, you know, it's always a subject predicate and
so on. And then, and then it seems that
it's just the way we communicate information and when
we do so we tend to do it in
a, in a, in a way that, you know,
the more interesting is communicated in the form of
a tail is like more interesting for the other
person is probably likely to remember. So this is
happening at some point, this is happening mostly unconsciously.
But her argument was that since the first or
the first narrative of a human evolution, the rest,
the rest of researchers basically are kind of fitting
their discoveries into pre-existing narratives and just kind of
tweaking, tweaking them a little bit. And then she
was actually mapping, you know, like there is a
um like one of the people who came out
with this theory is Joseph Campbell, who was an
anthropologist in New York. And actually like his, his
research on that is what inspired George Lucas to
write Star Wars. You know, the way it was
written is that the hero's tale, basically, what Campbell
found out is that like across cultures, like many
cultures who have different times in history, in different
continents, cultures that never met each other. So it's
not like they copied the other. They came out
with myths and stories and religions that kind of
follow the same narrative structure of the hero who
lives, you know, they're like homeland and they encounter
different problems and then a mentor shows up and
helps, you know, and then at the end of
the story is transformed into something bigger that comes
back home and helps the people around them. So
he found out that that kind of uh archetype
of the hero's journey tale. It's kind of uh
it repeats over and over again in different cultures,
in different myths and different religions. And what Lisa
Landau found out is that this also happens in
science. When people describe the results of their own
studies, even there are scientific studies with based on
scientific data analysis, still the way they communicate their
discussion, their conclusions is always in a narrative style
that sometimes also feed that Hitter's journey tale, you
know, and it's just it seems that her argument
is that this is just a way, this is
the way in which the human psyche works and
it's hard to escape from it, but we need
to be aware of it. So we when we
communicate or like raol a scientist, we do it
in a way that it is not just a
tale that it's OK, it has the shape of
a narrative, but it's communicating novel information, not just
building pre existing tail, right? So this is an
interesting perspective I thought for example, that only you
could only bring into the picture if you talk
to people outside the specific field of like the
regular science. Mhm
And so you interviewed all these variety of experts
uh asking them what it means to be human,
asking them questions about human evolution. So looking back
at that, what would you say are perhaps some
of the most disputed questions. There is the aspects
where uh looking at that variety of experts, you
would say they disagree the most on.
Oh, there, there are many of them. But I,
I guess I would say, um, one of them
is, is that what the, what I mentioned about,
is it useful to study human evolution from a
practical perspective? But it's just interesting, you know, it
went like, like, no, this is purely, like, you
know, in the same way that watching a movie
is not useful for anyone's life, but it's interesting
and entertaining. But this is the same, you know,
and it's based on real things that actually happened.
So it's even more and it's about us. So
it's therefore very interesting for everyone and no one
has to do it. Other people would actually argue
it's interesting, but it also has practical, practical issues,
not like the example of the Fukushima Station. But
there are other people who study more in the
medicine world, for example. And what we mentioned that
that it's interesting to understand the human evolution because
it seems that physiologically, for example, we are adapted
to, to not eat almost sugar or fats, right?
And that's why most of the the obesity pandemic
in the world is because we most diet now
are rich in the things that we are able
to eat very little. So basically, and this happens
also in other animals, like, you know, like orangutans
in the in the field, in the, you know,
in their habitats there, there's, there are sometimes there
are months or years in which there is almost
no food to eat no fruit. And they just,
they are literally chewing on the bark of the
tree because there's nothing to eat. So they are
adapted to like when there is something that has
sugars and fats, which has a lot of energy.
Their bodies are adapted over millions of years to
like suck it up in the form of fat.
So they can then survive for long periods of
time with no food or very little food or
low quality food. It seems that something like that
happened in the human lineage. But now we're just
eating the things that we are adapted not to
eat all the time and that is causing us
a lot of problems. Then one could argue, oh,
that is, is that really useful to know because
we already we know anyways that it is bad
for us. So just don't need it. Why it's
important to know that the evolutionary like explanation of
why this is the way it is. It is
a big discussion. Again, some people argue that you
can find having the evolutionary perspective can help you
find better solutions. So other things that is interesting,
but it's not going to change anything. Another big
dis discussion was about um uh what's that? The
human evolution, right? Like some expert would, would say,
is it possible to know? And Hogan, Hogan, it
probably was something a very complex process with different,
different things, interacting with other things, you know, and
it's hard to tell exactly what is the one
thing that jumpstarted human evolution. Others provide very clear
specific ideas on what happened is that the environment
changed, it was open. So we had to come
down the trees and they come by it and
it's a by product. We, our hands were free
from locomotion. Therefore, we start using them for making
tools and that made us smarter and blah blah,
blah, blah, blah, blah blah. So you very opposite
views. The same for the future question. Like some
people would argue that it's impossible to know it's
not happening in the future because everything is so
there's so much contingency. You know, we don't know
if a mere is gonna come next year and
kill everyone. We don't know climate change what's gonna
happen 15 years on the road. Others would argue
that for sure, gonna be exceeded 100 years from
now. Others are others provide like very specific perspective
about this is exactly how humans are gonna look
100,000 years from now. This is exactly how humans
are gonna look at a million years from now.
These are the reasons, right? So that was very
shocking to me as well. And then of course,
the one about religion and spirituality that you have
this big device, especially from faults in the US
and outside the US. But in the US. Like,
there are some exceptions, but the majority is, is
the place in which most researchers would if they
answer the question that they are, like, not compatible.
Basically, if you believe in religion and spirituality, you
are not a scientist, you know, and outside the,
outside the US, there are all kinds of views,
you know, especially there are some call from Asia
that you only have like Buddhist backgrounds and student
religion. They always like, feel like animals are like
kind of equal to human, you know, and they
just kind of feel that that one thing kind
of compliments the other and they actually feel that
ignoring um teaching that could come from the spiritual
world could kind of like blindside us in terms
of science. Maybe we're not studying something because we
think, oh, this is just some sort of like
Juju Mambo Jambo. Let's ignore this and some people
are like, well, maybe there's some science behind that,
let's actually look into it and see what happens,
you know. So it's that question clearly was a
big divide and then, but I guess I know
if I had to highlight the one. So,
uh le let me ask you about one specific
question. Uh And please tell me if this is
also something that people actually also disagree a lot
on. So what about specifically how people uh different
kinds of experts, anthropologists specifically but also others, how
they look at how universal is our human behavior
and psychology. I mean, in terms of, if you
look cross culturally, human behavior and psychology varies a
lot. Or if we have really a big common
human nature and our psychology is mostly universal. I
mean, is there lots, did you find lots of
disagreement there or
not? Well, I think, I guess some of that
came out in the, in the answers to the
question about whether or not humans are special and,
and, and the answer were not about it's, I
don't, I don't think it was any single answer.
That kind of doubted that humans as a whole
are kind of like, not different from each other.
Like we, I think it is this discussion is
about whether the human uniqueness is so unique or
is it like a degree of, so humans versus
a for example, other animals are like the difference
that we have are like a matter of degree
or there is like a matter of uh quality.
So like any human behavior today, you can see
some of it in a chimpanzee today. It's just
expressed there just as the same kind of capacity
that we have, but just to a lesser degree
or this something clearly distinctive. It's a clear cap
between being a human and not being a human
that was like kind of highly debated among the
different experts. And in, but no one doubted that
humans. They're like, it seemed, it seemed to me
that the implication of the answer is that they
don't consider that there is something different among humans
that they consider all humans to have a very
common psyche. And there's some commonalities in human nature.
And one of them is for example, this thing
about human language and the way we structure uh
communication in the form of a narrative that dictates
kind of the way that we think. I don't
like everyone, I think agrees that basically it's, it's
11 human nature and there would, you know, very
few attempt in terms of language. Um But the,
the debate is about whether or not it is
a clear cut with other animals or not. Mhm
And uh looking at our, the current state, the
state of the art, let's say of our understanding
of human evolution, what would you say are the
biggest known unknowns,
I mean, known and known. I mean, there are,
there are values of that. Uh ONE big debate
today is um there are many but one big
debate today is about the starting point of human
evolution. For example, like there, everyone since the molecular
revolution that started in the sixties and seventies, it
was kind of after the nineties, everyone, 99% of
the researchers agree that chimpanzees are are the living
closer relative to humans before that just looking at
the anatomy, you know, the morphology, I mean, it
was kind of like a surprise because you would
assume that a chimpanzee is closer to a gorilla
than to us. So that kind of blew everyone's
mind at the time. Um And then since then,
it's been kind of a i still ongoing debate
about, OK, so then the last, who was the
ancestor from, with chimpanzees and humans evolve? Was it
like a chimpanzee or was like something else? And
that's still like a big unknown? And you can
see, just look at the literature that, that some
people just assume that we work from something like
a chimpanzees. Other people assume that we work from
something completely different from a chimpanzee. Other people think
that some features of chimpanzees were an ancestor but
others were not in it. So that's still like
kind of if you ask different people, they would
tell you that's not unknown to me. I know
exactly the answer. But I would, I would suggest
that just looking at in general the literature of
how desperate the assumptions are in that sense, it's
not that clear consensus about who the ancestor of
chim chim humans was. And, and that's important because
it's basically the starting will be the starting point
of human evolution, but also the starting point of
chimpanzee evolution. Now one of the big unknowns today
that which is I kind of mind blowing for
many people. And to me too, even though I
work on this is that we don't have fossil
chimpanzees, we don't have fossil gorillas. So people argue,
we don't even have fossil oral utan. It's like,
how is it possible that there are like hundreds
of fossils of the human lineage or, or Africa,
Europe, Asia? But there are no fossil chimpanzees. I
mean, they're like few t that are just a
few 1000 years old. Not like they are not
million years old. They are. No, they do the
fossil record of chimpanzees, the fossil record of gorillas
and so on. It's kind of like, it's like
what happened? This is still kind of what the
hell happened, you know. Um It's a big mystery
and that's important because if we don't know, we
don't have these fossils, we cannot understand the revolution
and if we don't understand the evolution, we cannot
actually test if the ancestor of them and us
was like them or was like something else. Um
And then another unknown relating to that is that
in general, we know very little about the fossil
record of humans in, in Africa. We think we
know a lot because there are many fossils, especially
from Eastern Africa and South Africa, Southern Africa, but
like Africa is giant and like we know that
they were all over just we don't have them.
We know because like there are a few outliers,
like there are sites in central a central and
northern Africa in Chad where we found besides the
fossils of Saan Anthro was one possible early Hoy
of 7 million years. I know, I agree. It's
a harmony but it's a different story. Do we
have astro fossils there? Older than 3 million years?
We also have very bizarre fossil in Namibia, western,
like southern Africa. So, but they're like, they were
kind of accidental findings but they show you that
the, the picture is way more complex than what
we are. We think we, we think we know
what happened based on what we found but what
we found is not representative of what was there.
Mhm And I think this is this is kind
of, it's strange because this is known, but people
cannot, don't acknowledge it. That is that we have
this limitation. There's kind of, we don't talk about
it because it makes it even more complicated, you
know. Um And then still another big discussion today
is, is um you know, all these like we
know this the new genomic study showing that it
was all these hybridization between humans and other species
of humans until very recently. But some of them
don't, we don't even have like clear fossils that
go with. We only know that something different was
there based on the genes. But what was it,
you know, still kind of debated, even like um
a big unknown and high highly debated thing is
what went back to a previous answer question is
about this uniqueness of modern humans, Homo Sapiens there.
Our capacity for language and abstractions and conceptual world
basically building is that unique of Homo sapiens or
they were, there were other human species also capable
of that. So some argue that all human only,
only humans, only Homo sapiens has ever done all,
all the other variety of humans that lived before,
not like us. And that's why they are not
here anymore, you know, but for example, like even
neanderthals that we coexisted in Europe for like 10,000
plus years, like some people argue that they didn't
have a culture like a more human culture. And
they just, that's why we were able to basically
like over, I don't know, you kill them all
or drive to extinction or it's not clear exactly
what happened with the neanderthals. It's still a big
unknown, very debated how they become extinct when they
have been in Europe for so long. Um But
some ideas are like, well, they didn't have this
sophisticated mind conceptual system that we have. But they
are older. Like there is like a cave in
France, 200,000 year old, like Brunei cave. And they're
like very complex constructions inside the cave with the
static titan, static minds. And that was a Neanderthal
cave. So clearly, they, they were, they there was
something going on there that they're like some limited,
you know, they were making their own clothes, you
know, some argue they would bury their dead. So
it's kind of interesting that neanderthals were kind of
have a little bit of what we have, but
it's not clear exactly to what degree. But now
also we know that they were intervening with humans.
Good morning. The ship was almost happy. So, I
mean, it's hard to believe that they were like
mixing up with each other without shedding also like
culture and knowledge, right? So that's still a very,
it's kind of very intriguing and very and know
big unknown of what was happening at that time
and it was something so recent, relatively speaking,
right? So I have then one final question for
you and you even mentioned earlier when I asked
you about the questions that the experts in the
book uh disagreed the most on you mentioned uh
the religious or spiritual uh question. And I mean,
if the scientific perspective is compatible with that. So
I, I would like to hear your own thoughts
on that. Do you think that a scientific perspective
on humans is actually compatible with religious or spiritual
views of humans or not?
I think, I think, I think the spiritual and
religion, religious like behaviors are just part of the
human cultural repertoire. And so I, I, some, some
experts in the book have pointed this out that
it's worth studying them as any other aspect of
being a human. Um Because, you know, like me
personally, I think that religions are like there are
some commonalities about different religions as other people have
noticed and similar teachings. Another thing is how humans
have over the years centuries use religion, religious books
for their own convenience. That's a different story. But
religion itself, I think it's just, it's like a,
I think it's been selected. Right. Is, is, is,
is a way to, to be, to have a
set of rules of what is good behavior or
considered good behavior. But when they were written, maybe
they should have been updated with later on, maybe
they didn't. But, but like they, they seem to
have commonalities that might have been selected. So it's,
it's just, I think it's just they are part
of human behavior and they can study from an
evolutionary viewpoint. And in terms of spirituality, I think
it's a broad, a broad um question because to
me it means like, what, what, what, what do
you mean? You can ask different people, what is
the spirituality for you? You know, and like, you
know, like, for example, I don't believe that there
is like some sort of like man, old man
with a white beard sitting on top of a
cloud looking at us, you know, I don't, but
I think that that there are things that we
still don't understand exactly how they work and they've
been like different spiritual views developed over the centuries
about to explain them that might be based on
nothing but might be some true on them. They
just need more like scientific attention and maybe things
that we think are some sort of spiritual meaningless
things like 100 years from now, it will be
a basis of it, you know. So as someone
has pointed out before, I think uh uh a
scientist with an open mind should consider everything and
not just like scar things because that's kind of
a way to narrow, you know, the how much
reality you can kind of perceive and study.
Mhm OK. Great. So the book is again, Humans
Perspectives On our Revolution from world experts. I'm leaving
a link to it in the description box of
the interview. And doctor Amei just before we go,
would you like to tell people apart from the
book where they can find you on the internet?
Well, my name is not very common. So they
just Google me, they will come out with my
web page, which is just my name.com and there
I have like links to my research and other
things I work on so everything can be found
there.
Great. So thank you so much again for taking
the time to come on the show. It's been
a real pleasure to talk to you
like Way Ricardo.
Hi guys. Thank you for watching this interview. Until
the end. If you liked it, please share it.
Leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by N Lights Learning
and development. Then differently check the website at N
lights.com and also please consider supporting the show on
Patreon or paypal. I would also like to give
a huge thank you to my main patrons and
paypal supporters, Perera Larson Jerry Muller and Frederick Suno,
Bernard Seche O of Alex Adam, Castle Matthew Whitting
B no wolf, Tim Ho Erica LJ Connors, Philip
Forrest Connelly. Then the Met Robert Wine in NAI
Z Mark Nevs calling in Holbrook Field, Governor Mikel
Stormer Samuel Andre Francis for Agns Ferger Ken Herz
J and Lain Jung Y and the Samuel K
Hes Mark Smith J. Tom Hummel S Friends, David
Wilson Yasa, dear, Roman Roach Diego, Jan Punter, Romani
Charlotte, Bli Nicole Barba, Adam Hunt, Pavlo Stassi, Nale
Me, Gary G Alman, Samos, Ari and YPJ Barboza
Julian Price Edward Hall, Eden Broner Douglas Fry Franca,
Beto Lati Gilon Cortez or Solis Scott Zachary FTW,
Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Giorgio, Luke Loki, Georgio
Theophano, Chris Williams and Peter Wo David Williams di
A. Costa Anton Erickson Charles Murray, Alex Shaw, Marie
Martinez, Coralie Chevalier, Bangalore Larry Dey junior, Old Einon
Starry Michael Bailey. Then spur by Robert Grassy. Zoren
Jeff mcmahon, Jake Zul Barnabas Radick Mark Temple, Thomas
Dvor Luke Neeson, Chris Tory Kimberley Johnson, Benjamin Gilbert
Jessica. No week in the Brandon Nicholas Carlson Ismael
Bensley Man, George Katis Valentine Steinman, Perlis Kate Von
Goler, Alexander Albert Liam Dan Biar Masoud Ali Mohammadi
Perpendicular Jer Urla. Good enough, Gregory Hastings David Pins
of Sean Nelson, Mike Levin and Jos Net. A
special thanks to my producers is our web, Jim
Frank Luca. Toni Tom Veg and Bernard N Cortes
Dixon, Bendik Muller Thomas Trumble, Catherine and Patrick Tobin,
John Carl, Negro, Nick Ortiz and Nick Golden. And
to my executive producers, Matthew Lavender, Si Adrian Bogdan
Knits and Rosie. Thank you for all.